







   







              


shapes.geometric,arrows.meta,positioning,decorations.pathreplacing,calc,3d,patterns,decorations.markings
font=small, labelfont=bf, margin=1em


noitemsep, topsep=0.4em, parsep=0pt




[L]
[R]
plain
  
  [C]
  



[display]
  
   
  
  
*


  1em

  1em

  1em




unsrtnat




plain
theoremTheorem[chapter]
lemma[theorem]Lemma
corollary[theorem]Corollary
proposition[theorem]Proposition
prop[theorem]Proposition

definition
definition[theorem]Definition

remark
remark[theorem]Remark
example[theorem]Example


Tr





roman



		

	

	Decomposition of Unitary Operators


	

	A thesis submitted in partial fulfilment of the requirements

	for the degree of Bachelor of Science in Computer Science

	

	Vivek Soorya Maadoori

	

	

	
		Krea University

		

	

Declaration

I declare that this thesis is my own work and has not been submitted in any form for another
degree or diploma at any university or other institution of tertiary education. Information
derived from the published or unpublished work of others has been acknowledged in the text
and a list of references has been provided.



Vivek Soorya Maadoori



Acknowledgements

I owe a debt of gratitude to a number of people without whom this work would not have been possible.

First and foremost, I wish to express my heartfelt and sincere thanks to my supervisor, Dr. Mithilesh Kumar, for his patient guidance, insightful feedback, and unwavering support throughout this project. His clarity of thought and generosity with his time shaped this work in ways I am still coming to appreciate.

I am grateful to my peers and fellow students at the School of Interwoven Arts and Sciences, Krea University, whose conversations, questions, and encouragement kept me honest and curious. The intellectual community here has been a constant source of stimulation.

Finally, I thank my family for their love, patience, and steadfast belief in me. This work is, in no small part, a product of the stability and confidence that they have always given me.


AI Disclosure

This report presents a literature survey on quantum circuit decomposition. In preparing it, I used
AI language models as a study and writing aid: to help understand and clarify ideas from
research papers and textbooks; to transcribe and organize my handwritten notes into draft
form; and to assist with editing and proofreading for clarity and flow.

All mathematical derivations and technical explanations are drawn from the cited literature
and represent the work of the original authors. AI assistance was limited to summarization,
explanation, transcription of notes, and editing - no AI-generated content is presented as
my own work.



Abstract

This capstone report investigates the decomposition of unitary operators, with a focus on decomposition algorithms, the structure of basic quantum gates, and the role of entanglement in multi-qubit operations. The work is organised in three parts.
Part I develops the background necessary to study circuit synthesis. Chapter 1 establishes the mathematical framework (Hilbert spaces, qubits, and linear operators), the four postulates of quantum mechanics, and the core concepts of quantum information theory: pure and mixed states, density operators, entanglement and its measures, and quantum measurement. Chapter 2 covers the circuit model of quantum computation, treating circuit structure and complexity, standard gates, universality, approximation via the Solovay-Kitaev theorem, circuit identities (Z-Y decomposition, 
ABC factorisation, conjugation relations), and the Gray code argument for nn
n-qubit universality. Supporting mathematical tools-spectral decomposition, polar decomposition, and singular value decomposition-are also developed here.

Part II surveys the optimality literature directly relevant to this work, organised as a single chapter with one section per paper. Vidal and Dawson and Vatan and Williams together provide the complete solution for two-qubit gate synthesis: any two-qubit unitary can be implemented in at most three CNOT gates, with explicit optimal circuits at each tier depending on the gate's non-local parameters, and the magic basis playing a central role throughout. Yu, Duan, and Ying establish that five two-qubit gates are both necessary and sufficient for the Toffoli gate, resolving a long-standing open question via a rank argument on entangling power. Dur, Vidal, and Cirac classify three-qubit pure states into exactly six SLOCC-inequivalent classes-the GHZ class, the W class, three biseparable classes, and the fully separable class-providing the entanglement-theoretic backdrop for three-qubit gate complexity. Acin et al. establish a generalisation of the Schmidt decomposition to three-qubit systems, showing that every three-qubit pure state is characterised up to local unitary equivalence by five real parameters. Mottonen et al. introduce uniformly controlled rotations as a systematic decomposition scheme for arbitrary -qubit unitaries, achieving a CNOT count of  that is asymptotically optimal. Finally, Shirilord and Rahimi-Keshari propose the block-ZXZ decomposition as an alternative to the quantum Shannon decomposition, reducing the CNOT count for circuits of practical size and connecting the recursive structure directly to the rotation-gate identities of Part I.

Part III presents the design and implementation of Open Quantum Composer Pro, a professional drag-and-drop quantum circuit design and simulation tool built with Python and PyQt6. This desktop application enables visual quantum circuit composition through an intuitive graphical interface, with real-time Qiskit code generation and built-in simulation capabilities. The implementation demonstrates the integration of classical software engineering practices with quantum computing frameworks.


1em
Keywords: quantum computation, quantum circuits, circuit decomposition, entanglement, CNOT count, two-qubit synthesis, magic basis, Toffoli gate, SLOCC equivalence, uniformly controlled rotations, block-ZXZ decomposition, Solovay-Kitaev, Z-Y decomposition, Gray code, quantum circuit composer, drag-and-drop, Qiskit, PyQt6, MVC architecture, quantum simulation






arabic




Foundations and Circuit Model





Foundations

Quantum Computation and Quantum Information

Quantum Computation and Quantum Information (QCQI) combines computing and physics. Traditional computing does not take into account the laws of physics. Classical computing reduces to logical manipulation of bits (0,1). The value of a bit can only be 0 or 1. This is where quantum mechanics differs. Quantum Systems can exist in what is called a superposition: they are simultaneously both 0 and 1 - with less than 1 probability in each case. (The probabilities add up to 1 always though!). This new capability allows us to simultaneously explore many paths to a solution; a phenomenon that is called quantum parallelism. Quantum parallelism provides novel solution strategies that are impossible to achieve through classical computers.

Another novel feature of quantum systems is entanglement: non-local correlations. Entanglement is a property of composite quantum systems whereby correlations persist regardless of the amount of spatial separation of the subsystems.



Scope and Organisation

One of the primary hurdles in realizing quantum computers is applying quantum processes to quantum states. Isolating a quantum state is difficult; they are very short lived systems. On top of this, applying a quantum process is yet more difficult. In this context, it would be ideal to minimize the more expensive parts of applying  quantum process. One way this can be done is by designing better decomposition algorithms for unitary operators (quantum gates), the operators that mathematically represent certain ideal quantum processes. The primary goal of this capstone project is to investigate quantum circuit (unitary gate) decomposition,
with particular attention to decomposition algorithms, the structure of elementary gates, and
the role of entanglement in multi-qubit operations.

Chapter 1 establishes the background: the mathematical framework, the postulates of quantum
mechanics, and the essential concepts of quantum information theory. This material is
developed precisely to the point required by the circuit synthesis questions that motivate
the work. Readers already familiar with parts of this background may treat the corresponding
sections as reference material rather than sequential reading.

Chapter 2 develops the circuit model from first principles and covers the known results from
Nielsen and Chuang  (especially Chapter 4) that are needed for the
subsequent analysis: universality, approximation, circuit identities, and supporting operator
decompositions.

Part II surveys the optimality literature. These are results from research papers that are directly relevant to understanding how many CNOT gates are
required for various classes of gates, and what structures underpin those bounds.

Part III presents the design and implementation of Open Quantum Composer Pro, a professional 
drag-and-drop quantum circuit design and simulation tool. This part demonstrates practical 
application of quantum circuit concepts through a working desktop application.

Three Models of Computation

Quantum Computing introduces a new model of computation. Let's note how this model of computing differs: Firstly the fundamental unit of information in quantum computing is a vector, and the operations performed on this vector are restricted to Unitary Operations. Moreover, suprisingly enough, reading a state (measuring, as it is called) is non-trivial, since the very act of reading it changes the state (a phenomenon referred to as "collapse") - not something you would expect on a classical computer.

Classical and Probabilistic models of computation, though, share more with each other: the fundamental unit of information is the same (a bit); reading a value does not change it. But they too differ: for one thing classical model is deterministic, for another the state space in the probabilistic model is a probability distribution unlike in the classical model for which it is just the set 0,1.

Understanding quantum computation requires situating it relative to its classical and
probabilistic counterparts. tab:models summarises the key distinctions.


		Comparison of classical, probabilistic, and quantum models of computation.
		lXXX
		Aspect  & Classical & Probabilistic   & Quantum      

		Information unit & Bit                & Bit                      & Qubit                 

	State space      &           & Probability Distribution & Hilbert space  

	Evolution        & Deterministic      & Probabilistic            & Unitary               

	Measurement      & Non-destructive    & Non-destructive          & Disturbing            

		
This new model of computation is completely described by linear algebra, along with the postulates of quantum mechanics. Also, when working with quantum mechanics, it is very convencient to work with what is called dirac notation: a notation that makes it easier to represent and reason about vectors. So, let's familiarize  ourselves (or refresh our memories) with these three: dirac notation, necessary linear algebra and postulates of quantum mechanics.

 Dirac Notation
 is called a ket and is used to represent a column vector.
 is called a bra and is used to represent a row vector. Note how this makes the inner product (left multiplying the row with the column) look elegant: . Similarly, the outer product (left multiplying a column with a row) is represented so: 






Hilbert Spaces

[Hilbert Space]
	A Hilbert space is a complete, normed, inner product space over . The state of an isolated
	quantum system is described by a unit vector in . The dimension of  equals the
	number of degrees of freedom of the system. Both finite-dimensional  and
	infinite-dimensional  arise in quantum information processing.


We use a Hilbert space rather than a bare vector space because distinguishing quantum states
requires orthogonality, which in turn requires an inner product.


Inner Product on Cn


	The map  is a valid inner product
	on .


	Conjugate symmetry:
	.

	Linearity: follows from linearity of summation.

	Positive-definiteness:
	, with equality iff all .




Operators

There are primarily three kinds of operators we will be dealing with: Normal Operators, Unitary Operators and Hermitian Operators.

Normal Operators

	An operator  is normal if .

Both Unitary and Hermitian operators are Normal operators.

Unitary Operators

	An operator is Unitary if it satisfies the condition 
Unitary operators are the only permissible evolutions for closed quantum systems
(Postulate ). They satisfy , preserve inner products,
and are reversible. They can be thought of rotations and depend only on the initial and final state, not
on any intermediate path.

Hermitian Operators


	An operator  is Hermitian if . Hermitian operators represent
	physical observables; their eigenvalues are real and their eigenvectors form a complete
	orthonormal basis.
	As an example, the Hamiltonian  is the Hermitian operator representing energy. It
	determines all dynamics of the system through the Schrodinger equation.







The Four Postulates

Quantum mechanics is built on four postulates. They are not derived from anything more
fundamental - they are the rules of the game, chosen because they make predictions that
agree with experiment. Each postulate answers a specific question: what is a quantum
system, what happens to it when you look at it, what happens to it when you
leave it alone, and what happens when you put two systems together.

[Postulate 1 - State Space]
		An isolated quantum system is described by a Hilbert space . The state of the system
	at any instant is a unit vector .

Why a Hilbert space, and why a unit vector? The Hilbert space requirement is essentially the
requirement that we can talk about superpositions and interference - both of which require
an inner product. The unit vector requirement is essentially the requirement that
probabilities add up to : as we will see in Postulate 2, the probability of any
measurement outcome is computed from the inner product of  with itself, so if
that inner product is not , the probabilities will not either.

The dimension of  is the number of distinguishable states the system can be in. For
a qubit - a two-level system - , and any state is a unit vector
 with . This is
already different from a classical bit: the state is not just  or  but a continuous
combination of both, with complex coefficients carrying phase information that has physical
consequences.

[Postulate 2 - Measurement]
		Quantum measurements are described by a collection  of operators satisfying the
	completeness relation
	


	When the system is in state , outcome  occurs with probability
	


	and the state immediately after obtaining outcome  is
	




		







	Quantum measurement produces both a classical outcome  and a corresponding post-measurement state .
	
This postulate encodes the central strangeness of quantum mechanics. Before measurement,
the system is in a superposition , carrying simultaneous information about all
possible outcomes. Measurement does not just reveal a pre-existing value - it
produces an outcome non-deterministically and irreversibly changes the state. This is
called collapse. After collapse, the system is in , which is a normalised
version of : the part of the original state that is consistent with having
obtained outcome .

The completeness relation  is not an extra assumption - it is
a requirement that the probabilities are consistent. Since the  must sum to  for
any state , we need




for all . This holds if and only if , which is
exactly the completeness relation.

The most important special case is a projective measurement, where each 
is an orthogonal projector satisfying  and  for .
For a qubit measured in the computational basis,  and .
Applied to :





and the post-measurement state is . So measuring in the
computational basis yields  with probability  and  with
probability , and the state collapses to whichever outcome was obtained. This is
why  is required: probabilities must sum to .


	The relative phase between  and  has no effect on the outcome probabilities
	of a computational-basis measurement - only the moduli  and  appear.
	This might suggest that phase is physically irrelevant. It is not: phase becomes observable
	whenever a state interferes with itself, which is the mechanism behind every quantum
	algorithm that outperforms its classical counterpart. Phase is invisible to a single
	measurement but indispensable to the computation that precedes it.

[Postulate 3 - Composite Systems]
		The state space of a composite system  is the tensor product of the component spaces:
	


	If system  is in state  and system  is in state ,
	the joint state is , written .

The tensor product is what makes quantum computing exponentially powerful. Two qubits have a
joint Hilbert space of dimension , spanned by . A general two-qubit state is



which requires four complex amplitudes to specify. Three qubits require eight,  qubits
require . The state space grows exponentially in the number of qubits, and a quantum
computer manipulates all  amplitudes simultaneously - this is quantum parallelism.

Not every state in  factors as . The
state  is the simplest example: there is no choice of
 and  such that




equals , because that would require  and
 while simultaneously , which is
a contradiction. States that cannot be written as a tensor product of individual states are
called entangled. They are nonetheless perfectly legitimate elements of the tensor
product space - entanglement is not a pathology but a resource.


	Entanglement has no classical analogue. Two classical bits can be correlated (both  or
	both ), but their joint state is always a pair of individual values. Two entangled qubits
	do not have individual states at all: the system as a whole is in a definite state, but
	neither qubit alone is. Measuring one qubit instantaneously determines the outcome of
	measuring the other, regardless of the physical distance between them. This is the
	non-locality that Einstein called "spooky action at a distance", and it is the entanglement
	resource that gives quantum communication protocols like teleportation and superdense coding
	their power.

[Postulate 4 - Evolution]
		The time evolution of a closed quantum system is governed by a unitary operator :
	


	For every physically realizable closed-system evolution there exists a unitary  describing
	it, and conversely every unitary describes a physically realizable evolution.

Why must evolution be unitary? Three reasons, all of which turn out to be equivalent.
First, unitarity preserves the norm: , so a unit vector stays a unit vector and probabilities remain
consistent. Second, unitarity is equivalent to reversibility: , so the
evolution can always be undone by applying . Third, the Schrödinger equation
 (where  is the Hermitian Hamiltonian) has
solutions , and  is always
unitary when  is Hermitian.

We can verify unitarity explicitly for the simplest non-trivial case. The Pauli  gate,
which flips , has matrix . Then





confirming  is unitary. The same calculation works for , , , and every other
quantum gate: they are all unitary by construction.


	The contrast between Postulates  and  is the
	central tension of quantum mechanics. When a system evolves freely (Postulate 4), the
	evolution is deterministic, linear, and reversible. When it is measured
	(Postulate ), the outcome is probabilistic, nonlinear (the normalisation
	step  is not a linear map), and irreversible. A quantum computation
	exploits both: unitary gates manipulate the amplitudes deterministically to make the desired
	answer probable, and then measurement extracts the answer. The art of quantum algorithm
	design is arranging the unitary part so that measurement is likely to give the right answer.

Quantum model of computation

Quantum model of computation has four stages:

	We start with an initial state 
	Transform the state by performing unitary operations on the state to get a final state 
	Measure the state  in a basis of choice
	Perform analyses on the measurement outcomes

Hereafter, we use a model of computation that uses two-level systems.



Quantum Bits

[Qubit]
	A qubit is the quantum analogue of a classical bit. Its state is a unit vector
	


	where . When the basis of representation and the basis of measurement are the same, one can read of the probabilities of measuring a given basis state as the square of the modulus of the amplitude. In this case, for example, given we measure in the computational basis, Measurement yields outcome  with probability 
	and outcome  with probability .

Single qubits
Every single-qubit state can be written in the Bloch sphere parametrisation:



where  is the polar angle and  is the azimuthal angle. There is also an overall global phase which is not mentioned here. As long as the phase is global it can be ignored. [Refer to appendix for the distinction between global and relative phases]


		
	Bloch sphere representation of a qubit. Any pure state  corresponds to a point on the unit sphere. The polar angle  (from the -axis) and azimuthal angle  (in the -plane) are the spherical coordinates.
	



Single-qubit gates
Examples of single qubit gates are the Pauli gates: , , , .
Pauli Operators

Just as a vector space has a basis, even the space of linear operators does. The Pauli operators form a basis for all single-qubit operators:







Their action on the computational basis:
*2
	X0 & = 1, & X1 & = 0;	Y0 = -i1, Y1 = i0;         

	Z0 & = 0, & Z1 & = -1.

Note .

The Pauli operators  correspond geometrically to rotations about the -, -, and -axes of the Bloch sphere.

Multi-qubits
Multi-qubit gates come two primary flavours: separable and entangled. If there are more than two gates, then the system can exhibit entanglement at multiple level like bipartite entanglement tripartite entanglement, etc.
Multi-qubit gates
Examples of multi-qubit gates include Controlled-Not (or CX), Controlled-Z (or CZ), , , etc. Among these, there are those that have entangling power like CX and CZ, and those that do not have entangling power like , and 
Global and Relative Phase.



	Global phase: multiplies the entire state by  and is not
	      physically observable, so .
	Relative phase: between components of a superposition is physically
	      significant and is responsible for the quantum interference effects central to quantum algorithms.
	      Since  and  are orthogonal (they differ by a phase of ), the
	      relative phase encodes information genuinely independent of the amplitudes.



Conclusion to Foundations
In this chapter, we have laid the mathematical foundations necessary to talk about quantum computation. We have looked at Hilbert Spaces, Linear Operators, Postulates of Quantum Mechanics and Dirac Notation. Knowing the mathematical formalism only gets you so far. It can be hard to reason about properties of processes when you are working with the something so low-level. It pays to go an extra step that helps us to reason about quantum processes in a convenient manner. Let's look at a convenient way to represent quantum operations: the Circuit Model.






Circuits

Circuit Structure and Complexity

Having seen the fundamental required, lets get ourselves familiar with a useful representation of quantum information and processes: circuits. 
A quantum circuit consists of input wires (qubits entering), gates (quantum
operations), and output wires (qubits exiting). The temporal dimension is represented horizontally: the gates closer to the input wires are applied before gates relatively farther away from them. Then, a time slice is an instant at
which one or more gates apply in parallel. Three types of qubits appear: input, output, and
measured. An output qubit may undergo further processing; a measured qubit on the other hand has been read out. (It might be interesting note that, by what is called the principle of 'Deferred Measurement' all the measurements in a circuit can be pushed to the farthest end of the circuit)


		
	 & H & 1 &  

	 & &   & 
		A simple two-qubit quantum circuit: a Hadamard gate (a gate acting on a single qubit) followed by a CNOT (a gate acting on two qubits at once), creating entanglement and measurement.
	

A peculiar thing about quantum circuits is that multiple circuits can represent the same quantum computation in so far as the final outcome of the operation is concerned. Thus, it might be useful to pick a 'better' circuit that consumes less resources. Three independent complexity measures characterise a circuit for this purpose:

	Gate complexity : the total number of operations.
	Depth: the number of time slices (parallel time complexity).
	Width: the number of wires (space complexity).

Consider this: you create a quantum circuit for a specific quantum processes on a specific number of qubits. A natural consideration following this is to generalize it n qubits. In this regard, we introduce terms that help make conversations around this easier: family of circuits, a uniform family of circuits, efficient uniform family of circuits.

[Circuit Family]
	A family of circuits provides one circuit per input size . If the family
	can be generated algorithmically it is uniform. If the generating algorithm runs in
	polynomial time for every circuit in the family, it is an efficient uniform family.

The family of circuits implementing the Quantum Fourier Transform is an efficient uniform
family.

Just as classical computers have a NAND gate that is used to synthesis all classical operations, quantum computation has gate sets that are used to synthesize all quantum operations. In the following sections we explore these basis sets, their limitations and work-arounds.

Universality

[Universality]
	A set  of quantum gates is universal if any unitary operation on any
	number of qubits can be approximated to arbitrary precision using gates from .

Universal sets for each computational model:

	Classical: .
	Reversible classical: .
	Quantum: ; or any 2-qubit entangling gate together with
	      all 1-qubit gates.

Universal Sets



Toffoli Gate

The Toffoli gate described by the operation 
is classical, reversible, its own inverse, and leaves the control bits
unchanged. It is universal for reversible classical computation. The same operation can be generalized to quantum computation.

CNOT, H, T
CNOT Gate

Flips the target qubit if and only if the control is :




pi/8 Gate





The gate is named for the global phase factor .

Hadamard Gate











Universality comes with a catch -Approximation
Although gate sets like CNOT, H, T approximate all closed quantum operations, they do not do so perfectly with a finite sequence of operations - at least not for all closed quantum operations. At any rate, quantum states and operations are implemented with a level of noise; as long as our approximation is within the noise level, it does not really matter, since any further precision beyond that is lost anyway. 
[Approximation Error]
	The error of approximating a target unitary  by  is
	



Not all gate sets make the cut for Universality

Let's say you put together a few gates and want to see whether they are enough to approximate all quantum operations. Even before we can do that, we might have to see if they at least approximate all single-qubit operations. The following result called the Solovay-Kitaev theorem helps us do exactly that:
[Solovay-Kitaev ]
		A gate set satisfying the following three conditions can implement any single-qubit gate to
	error at most  using  gates, where  is a
	universal constant:
	
	Rotation angles are not rational multiples of .
	The two rotation axes are linearly independent in the Bloch sphere.
	The set is closed under inverses via finite composition.
		All three conditions are internal to the gate set. The set  satisfies them, so
	 is an efficient universal set.

An example gate set: Since  and  are rotations about non-parallel axes on the Bloch sphere, the set
 is universal for single-qubit operations. As we will see later, combined with CNOT as an entangling gate,
 is universal for arbitrary quantum computation.


But, universality is not all that matters. We also want to be able to efficiently approximate gates. A universal set is efficient if every unitary can be implemented using polynomially
many gates in both  and . To approximate  single-qubit gates with total
error , each gate is approximated to quality , requiring
 gates from the set. The total gate count is .

Having looked at the criteria that qualifies a gate set to approximate single qubit unitaries, let us now look at some standard decompositions of single qubit unitaries, ie gates that help approximate single-qubit unitaries and their sequencing.

Decomposition of Single-Qubit Unitaries

Z-Y Decomposition

[Z-Y Decomposition]
		Any single-qubit unitary  can be written as
	
	for some real .


	Step 1 (Parametric form).
	Since  is unitary,  forces the columns to be orthonormal and
	 forces the rows to be orthonormal. From these constraints there exist
	 such that
	

	Step 2 (Verify the decomposition).
	Compute :
	







	Premultiplying by :
	







	Multiplying by  recovers exactly eq:Uparam.

	Step 3 (Unitarity check).
	.
	.
	The  check follows similarly.

The Z-X Variant

An analogous decomposition holds using  in place of . Computing :







The same orthonormality argument yields .
The two decompositions are related via the conjugation identity 
(thm:conjX).

The X-Y Variant

A third decomposition uses  and  as the two rotation axes. Since  and  are
linearly independent directions on the Bloch sphere, successive rotations about these axes
can reach any orientation. Computing :









The same orthonormality argument as in the Z-Y case yields



for some real . The X-Y decomposition is related to the Z-Y
decomposition via the Hadamard gate, which interchanges the - and -axes of the Bloch
sphere: . Consequently any Z-Y circuit can be converted to
an X-Y circuit by conjugating each  gate with Hadamard gates. This variant arises
naturally when a hardware platform's native gate set favours  and  rotations over
 rotations, and also appears in the Euler angle parametrisation used by some quantum
compilers.

As we step into the slightly more complicated world of multi-qubit gates, it pays to know controlled operations. A controlled operation is a multi-qubit operations whose action on a target qubit is determined by the state of the control qubit. Now, in the next section, we will look at how to make a controlled operation from a single qubit operation, with the help of some CNOTs.

ABC Factorisation

[ Factorisation]
		Any single-qubit unitary  can be written as  where
	,  are single-qubit unitaries, and the controlled version  is
	implemented using two applications of CNOT and three of these single-qubit gates.


	By thm:zy, . Define:
	

	Verify : combining adjacent  and  rotations using the addition rule,
	*

	
		
	control & e^i & 1 & & 1 & 

	target  & A          &   & B &  & C
		 factorisation of the controlled- gate. With , the control qubit acquires phase  while the target applies  when the control is , giving .
		
	The two key identities driving the construction are  and
	conjugation of , which together give 
	reduced to , while . Inserting CNOT gates on the control qubit
	realises the phase  only when the control is , yielding .

Now that we have seen all the essential components, lets look at an actual universal set of gates: one that approximates any quantum operation on a closed quantum system.







Universality of Single-Qubit Gates and CNOT

The preceding analysis establishes that any single-qubit unitary can be expressed as
. Together with the  factorisation,
this yields a complete universality statement for multi-qubit computation.

[Universality of single-qubit gates and CNOT]
		The set consisting of all single-qubit unitary gates together with the two-qubit 
	gate is universal for quantum computation: any -qubit unitary can be exactly decomposed
	into single-qubit gates and  gates.


	The proof proceeds in two steps. First, any single-qubit gate  can be implemented exactly
	using , , and  rotations via the Z-Y decomposition (
Crefthm:zy). Second,
	the  factorisation (
Crefthm:abc) shows that any controlled- gate  can be
	implemented using two  gates and single-qubit gates. The Gray code argument
	(
Crefsec:graycodearg) then lifts this to arbitrary -qubit unitaries: by induction on
	, any -qubit unitary can be expressed as a product of single-qubit gates and 
	gates, with no approximation required.


	Theorem  is an exact universality result: every -qubit
	unitary can be exactly decomposed (not merely approximated). The cost is that the
	gate set is infinite-it includes all real rotation angles. In practice, hardware platforms
	provide only finitely many native gates, which is why the Solovay-Kitaev approximation
	theorem is also needed.





The Gray Code Argument for n-Qubit Universality

The preceding sections established that  is a universal gate set and that
the Solovay-Kitaev theorem guarantees efficient approximation. This section provides the
constructive proof: how single-qubit rotation gates together with  suffice to implement
any -qubit unitary. The argument has two stages: first, the Z-Y decomposition shows that
any single-qubit unitary decomposes into rotation gates; second, the Gray code argument shows
how to promote single-qubit operations to controlled multi-qubit unitaries using  alone.

The Gray code is a binary counting scheme in which consecutive words differ in exactly one
bit. Its role in universality proofs is to enable a "one gate per bit-flip" strategy for
constructing multi-qubit controlled operations from single-qubit gates and .


		
	Reflected Gray code sequence for 4 bits. Each step flips exactly one bit, enabling a single CNOT to transition between adjacent words. This property is the foundation of the Gray code argument for -qubit universality.
	
The argument proceeds in three stages:

	Isolate the transformation. Step through Gray code words, flipping one bit
	      at a time, until the target basis state is isolated. Stop at step  because words
	       and  differ in exactly one bit.
	Apply the controlled unitary. Collect all relevant amplitude into one qubit
	      (localisation) and apply the operation there. This is possible because a single-qubit
	      gate has only 2 complex entries per row or column.
	Restore. Reverse the Gray code steps to distribute the transformed
	      amplitude back to the correct qubits.

The key point is that  acts non-trivially only on  (the last bit is ),
not on , , or any other computational basis state. This locality makes
the construction work. Together, single-qubit gates and  are sufficient to implement
arbitrary -qubit unitaries.

[Why the Gray code works: a closer look]
	The following notes unpack the proof idea more carefully.

	What the Gray code achieves.
	A standard binary count (e.g. ) can change two or more bits at once
	(e.g.  flips both bits). Each such transition would require more than one CNOT
	to implement and would entangle multiple qubits simultaneously, making it impossible to
	isolate a single amplitude. The reflected Gray code (e.g. ) changes
	exactly one bit per step. This means each transition is implementable by a single CNOT,
	and the isolation and restoration steps each cost exactly  CNOT gates.

	Why we stop at step .
	The Gray code on  bits visits all  words in a cycle; consecutive words differ in
	exactly one bit. To isolate the basis state , we step through 
	transitions, applying a CNOT at each step to flip the appropriate bit. After  steps,
	the last two consecutive Gray code words differ in their final bit, meaning the controlled
	unitary  can be applied by a single controlled operation on that qubit alone. The
	restoration phase then reverses the  CNOT steps.

	Gate count.
	The isolation phase uses  CNOT gates; the controlled- phase uses at most a constant
	number of single-qubit gates; the restoration phase uses another  CNOT gates. Since
	this is applied once per basis state and the  factorisation of a single-qubit gate
	requires at most two CNOT gates (see thm:abc), the total CNOT cost for an arbitrary
	-qubit unitary is , which matches the known optimal bound up to a constant.

	Connection to the  factorisation.
	The Gray code argument relies on the fact that any single-qubit gate  can be written as
	 with  (thm:abc). The identity
	 is precisely what allows the "restore" half of the Gray code: on computational
	basis states where the control is , the circuit applies  (identity); on
	the one state where the control is , it applies
	. Without the  condition, the
	restoration would not cancel and the circuit would corrupt states other than the target.















The KAK Decomposition

The Z-Y decomposition of thm:zy tells us everything about single-qubit unitaries: any
element of  can be expressed as a product of three rotation gates. The natural next
question is whether there is an analogous canonical form for two-qubit unitaries. The KAK
decomposition, named after the Lie-theoretic double coset decomposition ,
provides exactly this.

The idea is straightforward once you know the right way to split up a  unitary.
Any two-qubit unitary  can be written as



where  are single-qubit unitaries (the "local" part) and
 is a two-qubit interaction generated by a Hamiltonian of the form





		
	KAK decomposition of a two-qubit unitary . The two local unitaries  and  require no CNOT gates; the entangling core  requires 1-3 CNOT gates depending on its non-local parameters.
	
with real coefficients  (the "non-local" part). The three real parameters
 with  capture everything about
the gate that cannot be undone by single-qubit operations alone.

Why is this useful? Because local unitaries are cheap: they are just single-qubit rotations,
which require no CNOT gates. The three non-local parameters therefore encode precisely what
requires entangling gates to implement. A gate at the origin (all three parameters zero) is a
product of single-qubit gates and needs zero CNOTs. Moving away from the origin costs at
least one CNOT; reaching a generic interior point costs three.

Some gates occupy special parameter values. The CNOT gate, the controlled-
gate, and the  gate all correspond to named points in the parameter space.
The SWAP gate sits at , which is
the hardest point to reach and requires the full three CNOTs.

The KAK decomposition is the backbone of two-qubit circuit synthesis. The results of Vidal
and Dawson and of Vatan and Williams (ch:optimality) are both, at their core,
implementations of the KAK decomposition with explicit constructions for the interaction
term  using CNOT gates. Understanding the three non-local parameters makes the counting
argument transparent: three real parameters require three independent entangling operations
to dial in, and each CNOT gate controls one parameter.



The Cosine-Sine Decomposition

While the KAK decomposition gives us the right picture for two-qubit gates, we need a
different tool to decompose arbitrary -qubit unitaries recursively. The cosine-sine
decomposition (CSD) is the matrix-theoretic engine that makes recursive quantum circuit
synthesis possible.

The starting point is elementary: any unitary matrix  of even dimension can be partitioned
into four blocks of equal size. If  acts on  qubits and we single out the most
significant qubit as a "top" qubit and group the remaining  qubits as the "bottom",
then  takes the  block form



where each block is . The blocks are not themselves unitary, so we
cannot immediately recurse. The CSD resolves this.

[Cosine-Sine Decomposition]
		Let  be a  unitary. There exist unitary matrices 
	of size  and a real diagonal matrix  with entries in
	 such that
	








		
	Cosine-sine decomposition of a  unitary . The middle cosine-sine block becomes uniformly controlled rotations; the block-diagonal outer factors are recursively decomposed. This is the engine behind the quantum Shannon decomposition.
	
The middle factor is the "cosine-sine" matrix: it is a sequence of two-dimensional
rotations, one for each diagonal entry of . The outer factors are block-diagonal
unitaries, meaning they act on the top qubit's two subspaces independently and can be handled
recursively by decomposing  the same way.

This is the structural insight behind the quantum Shannon decomposition (QSD), which
applies the CSD recursively until only single-qubit gates and CNOT gates remain. Each
application of the CSD peels off one level of recursion. The middle cosine-sine block becomes
a sequence of uniformly controlled  rotations-exactly the uniformly controlled
rotations studied by Möttönen et al. (ch:optimality). The total CNOT count of
 in the leading order is determined by summing the CNOT costs at
each level of the recursion.

The CSD is also the reason that the Möttönen et al. decomposition and the quantum Shannon
decomposition are so closely related: both are implementations of the same recursive
matrix-splitting strategy, differing only in how they handle the interaction block.



The Cartan Decomposition

The KAK decomposition of the previous section was stated in physical terms, with the
interaction written as . The deeper mathematical
structure behind it is the Cartan decomposition of a Lie algebra-a way of splitting
any Lie algebra into two complementary subspaces in a manner compatible with the Lie bracket.

To see why this is relevant, recall that  has a Lie algebra 
consisting of  traceless skew-Hermitian matrices. We want to split this algebra
into a "local" part and a "non-local" part. The relevant split is:



where  consists of matrices of the form  (acting identically on
both subspaces, corresponding to local operations), and  is the orthogonal
complement under the Killing form. For the two-qubit case, this gives







Exponentiating, every  can be written as



which is precisely the KAK decomposition. The three-dimensional space  is
why the non-local content of a two-qubit gate is parametrised by three real numbers : these are the coordinates of  in the basis .


	The Cartan decomposition extends to larger systems. For  qubits, the relevant split of
	 again produces a "local" subalgebra  and a non-local
	complement , but  now has dimension growing exponentially with
	. This is another way to see why the CNOT count for an arbitrary -qubit gate is
	: the non-local content lives in an exponentially large space, and each CNOT gate
	can address at most one degree of freedom within it.

The Cartan decomposition explains why three parameters suffice to characterise
the non-local content of a two-qubit gate. These three real numbers 
with  arise from the structure of Lie algebras:
they are the coordinates in a maximal abelian subalgebra of the non-local part
 of .



The Kraus-Cirac Decomposition

With the KAK decomposition in place, there remains a practical question: given a specific
two-qubit unitary , how do we find its three non-local parameters  and
the corresponding local unitaries ? This is what the Kraus-Cirac
decomposition  provides.

The key ingredient is the magic basis-the same basis that plays a central role in
the work of Vidal and Dawson and of Vatan and Williams (ch:optimality). The magic
basis consists of the four Bell states arranged as columns of the matrix




The magic basis is special because it transforms the local subgroup 
into : if  with , then .
In other words, local unitaries look like real orthogonal matrices in the magic basis.

For any two-qubit unitary , its magic-basis representation is
.

The Kraus-Cirac decomposition then proceeds as follows. From , form the matrix
 (where  denotes the ordinary transpose, not the adjoint). This
matrix is symmetric and unitary. Its eigenvalues take the form , and the
four eigenvalues come in conjugate pairs. The three non-local parameters 
are extracted directly from these eigenvalues via




after appropriate reordering. Once the coordinates are known, the local unitaries
 are recovered from the diagonalising transformation.

[Kraus-Cirac,]
		Every two-qubit unitary  admits the decomposition
	


	with  and . The parameters
	are computed from the eigenvalues of  in the magic basis. The
	decomposition is unique up to the symmetries of the parameter space.


	The Kraus-Cirac decomposition is constructive: given the  matrix of , one
	can compute  and the local unitaries by a fixed sequence of linear-algebraic
	operations (diagonalisation of a symmetric unitary matrix, followed by a change of basis).
	This makes it directly implementable in quantum compilers. In the context of Part II, it is
	the bridge between the three non-local parameters and the explicit circuit constructions
	of Vatan and Williams.



Summary

This chapter has developed the circuit model from elementary gates up to the tools needed to
understand optimal decomposition. Let's briefly take stock of where we are.

The Z-Y decomposition handles the single-qubit case completely: any element of  is
exactly three rotation gates. The  factorisation then shows how to promote single-qubit
universality to multi-qubit universality via CNOT, and the Gray code argument makes this
constructive with an  CNOT count.

Moving to two-qubit gates, the KAK and Cartan decompositions reveal that a generic
 element has a three-dimensional non-local part, parametrised by the three
non-local parameters . The Kraus-Cirac decomposition makes this computable from the
matrix entries of the gate. The cosine-sine decomposition then provides the recursive engine
for going beyond two qubits, splitting an -qubit unitary into smaller pieces at each
level of the recursion.

What none of this tells us yet is how few gates are genuinely necessary. We know
three CNOTs suffice for any two-qubit gate because the non-local part is three-dimensional.
But can we prove three are required? Can we say anything similar about three-qubit gates?
How does the structure of entanglement interact with the number of CNOT gates a gate requires?

These are the questions Part II addresses. The papers surveyed there-Vidal and Dawson,
Vatan and Williams, Yu, Duan and Ying, Dür, Vidal and Cirac, Acín et al., Möttönen et al.,
and Shirilord and Rahimi-Keshari-all take the tools of this chapter as their starting
point and push them toward definitive lower bounds and optimal constructions.




Optimality




Optimal Decomposition of Unitary Operators

The circuit model developed in Part I provides the language for this chapter. We know that
any -qubit unitary can be exactly decomposed into single-qubit gates and CNOT gates
(thm:sq-cnot-univ), and that the CNOT count is  (sec:graycodearg).
We know that the non-local content of a two-qubit gate is captured by three real
non-local parameters  via the KAK decomposition, and that these parameters can be
read off from the gate's magic-basis representation via the Kraus-Cirac procedure
(thm:kraus-cirac). What Part I does not tell us is how few gates are genuinely
necessary.

This chapter turns to the research literature to answer that question. The narrative runs
from the complete solution for two-qubit gates, through the entanglement-theoretic structure
that governs three-qubit complexity, to the general- decomposition schemes that approach
the known asymptotic lower bound. Five groups of authors are surveyed, each contributing a
distinct piece of the picture.



Optimal Two-Qubit Gate Synthesis

The two-qubit case has a definitive answer, arrived at by two groups working
simultaneously. Vidal and Dawson  established the bound; Vatan and
Williams  made it constructive. Together they constitute the complete
solution to the two-qubit synthesis problem.

The Problem and What Was Known

A two-qubit unitary  acts on a four-dimensional Hilbert space. From the
degrees-of-freedom count,  has dimension , while the local subgroup
 has dimension . The non-local content of  therefore lives in a
-dimensional space. This counting argument, made precise by the KAK
decomposition of sec:kak, says that up to single-qubit operations, a two-qubit gate
is characterised by exactly three real parameters .

Before Vidal-Dawson and Vatan-Williams, it was known that three CNOT gates are sufficient
(a circuit could be written down), but it was not known whether three were always necessary.
The question was: does every generic two-qubit gate genuinely require all three, or can
some clever circuit always do it in two?

Why Three Parameters Require Three CNOTs

The key insight is a dimension argument applied not to the gate but to the set of
	gates reachable by circuits of a given CNOT count.

Consider the set of two-qubit unitaries implementable by circuits with at most  CNOT
gates and arbitrary single-qubit rotations. Each single-qubit rotation contributes real
continuous parameters (angles), and each CNOT is a fixed discrete gate. A circuit with
 CNOT gates and single-qubit blocks between them has the form



where each  is a product of single-qubit gates, contributing at most  real parameters
(three per qubit, from the Z-Y decomposition). With  CNOT gates, the circuit has at most
 continuous parameters in total. However, the circuit does not explore these
parameters independently: the CNOT gates impose constraints that prevent the parameters
from independently addressing all dimensions of .

More precisely, Vidal and Dawson showed the following. The set of unitaries reachable by
circuits with at most  CNOT gates is, generically, a manifold of real dimension at most
 (the 6 comes from the local part, and each CNOT gate can contribute at most 3
new non-local dimensions when combined with single-qubit rotations). Since the non-local
content of a generic  element requires 3 independent parameters, one needs at least
 CNOT gates. Two CNOT gates can reach only a measure-zero subset of : namely,
the gates with two non-zero parameters (satisfying  or ).

[Vidal and Dawson ]
		Three CNOT gates are necessary and sufficient to implement any two-qubit unitary
	 up to single-qubit operations. Two CNOT gates suffice if and only if the
	non-local parameters of  satisfy , i.e., the gate has only two non-zero
	parameters.

The sufficiency proof constructs an explicit circuit. Using the Kraus-Cirac procedure of
thm:kraus-cirac, compute  from the magic-basis matrix . The interaction term  can then be
implemented as follows. Note that




because the three generators , ,  mutually commute (each is a tensor product of
Pauli operators, and tensor products of commuting operators commute). Each factor
 is a two-qubit rotation that can be implemented using one CNOT gate
and single-qubit rotations around the -axis. Three such factors give three CNOT gates.
The local unitaries  and  from the KAK decomposition
contribute no additional CNOT gates since they are products of single-qubit operations.

The Three Tiers: Vatan and Williams

While Vidal and Dawson establish the count, Vatan and Williams  provide the
explicit circuit construction for each tier, and prove that the construction is optimal gate
by gate.

Their starting point is the magic basis property established as their Theorem 1: for any
real orthogonal matrix , the magic-basis representation  is again in . Equivalently, real two-qubit unitaries become non-entangling in
the magic basis-they factor as a tensor product of two  matrices. This is the key
structural fact that makes the  case cheaper than the general  case.

The three-tier structure is as follows.

Tier 1: Gates in  - two CNOTs.
Since  gates are real orthogonal, their parameters satisfy 
(the  interaction vanishes). The interaction reduces to , which
requires only two CNOT gates. The full circuit uses 12 elementary single-qubit gates and
2 CNOTs.

Tier 2: Gates in  with  - two CNOTs and one SWAP.
A gate with determinant  introduces one additional sign that must be accounted for.
Vatan and Williams show this can be handled by appending a SWAP gate (which has determinant
) and then reducing to the  case. The circuit uses 12 elementary gates, 2 CNOTs,
and 1 SWAP.

Tier 3: Gates in  - three CNOTs.
For a generic two-qubit gate, all three non-local parameters are nonzero and the full
interaction  is needed. Vatan and Williams construct an
explicit circuit (their Figure 7) implementing this interaction using exactly 3 CNOTs and
15 elementary single-qubit gates.



		
	Vatan-Williams three-tier classification of two-qubit gate synthesis. Each tier corresponds to a different region of parameter space. The CNOT count increases from 2 to 3 as the gate moves away from  toward the SWAP point.
	
[Vatan and Williams ]
		Every two-qubit gate in  can be realised, up to a global phase, by a circuit of
	 elementary one-qubit gates and  CNOT gates. This construction is optimal: computing
	the SWAP gate requires at least  CNOT gates.

The optimality proof for Tier 3 uses the SWAP gate as a witness. SWAP has parameters
, the point farthest from the origin. Vatan and Williams prove by contradiction that any circuit with two CNOT gates
computing SWAP would force the two CZ subcircuits (into which the CNOTs are decomposed) to
each have all parameters in . But then the circuit computes a product of Pauli
operators, which is not the SWAP gate. Therefore two CNOTs are insufficient, and three are
both necessary and sufficient for any gate with all three parameters non-zero.

What the Two Papers Together Give Us

The division of labour is precise. Vidal and Dawson prove the number: three, and show which
gates need only two. Vatan and Williams prove the circuits: exactly how to build a three-CNOT
(or two-CNOT) implementation for any gate you can specify. The parameter picture of
sec:kak is the common language. A gate's three non-local parameters determine its CNOT
tier, and the Kraus-Cirac decomposition of kraus-cirac tells you what those
parameters are.



The Entanglement Structure of Three-Qubit States

Before asking about the CNOT cost of three-qubit gates, it is worth stepping back and asking
a more fundamental question: what kinds of entanglement can a three-qubit state have? The
answer, provided by Dür, Vidal, and Cirac  and by Acín et al. ,
is more subtle than the bipartite case and has direct consequences for the complexity of
three-qubit gate synthesis.

In the two-qubit case, the Schmidt decomposition (thm:schmidt) gives a complete
picture: a pure state is either separable (Schmidt rank 1) or entangled (Schmidt rank 2),
and all entangled pure states are locally equivalent up to a single parameter (the Schmidt
coefficient). Three-qubit entanglement is qualitatively richer, and understanding it is a
prerequisite for understanding why gates like the Toffoli are hard.

SLOCC Classification: Dür, Vidal, and Cirac

The right equivalence relation for this question is stochastic local operations and
	classical communication (SLOCC). Two states  and  are
SLOCC-equivalent if each can be obtained from the other with nonzero probability using only
local operations and classical communication. In terms of matrices,  and
 are SLOCC-equivalent if and only if there exist invertible (not necessarily
unitary) local operators  such that



SLOCC is the natural equivalence for asking about what kind of entanglement a state
has, as opposed to how much (which is the question answered by entanglement measures
under LOCC).

[Dür, Vidal, and Cirac ]
		The set of pure three-qubit states is partitioned into exactly six SLOCC-inequivalent
	classes:
	
	The GHZ class, represented by .
	The W class, represented by .

	Three biseparable classes , , ,
	      in which exactly one qubit is unentangled with the other two.
	The fully separable class .
	
	
		
	SLOCC classification of three-qubit pure states (Dur-Vidal-Cirac). Six inequivalent classes: two genuinely tripartite (GHZ and W), three biseparable, and one fully separable. The GHZ and W classes are distinguished by the tangle:  vs .
		
The proof proceeds by tracking how the ranks of the reduced density operators
 transform under invertible local operations. An invertible local
operator  can change the eigenvalues of 
but cannot change their ranks (since rank is preserved under invertible maps). The rank
profile  of the reduced density operators is therefore an SLOCC invariant.
For a fully separable state, all three ranks are 1. For a biseparable state of type -,
the rank of  is 1 while the others may be 2. For genuine tripartite entanglement,
all three ranks are 2.

The key result is that within the genuinely tripartite class (all ranks equal to 2),
there are still two inequivalent sub-classes. This is the surprising part. The GHZ and W
states both have all reduced density matrices of rank 2, yet no invertible local operation
can convert one into the other. The witness that distinguishes them is the tangle
 for the two-qubit reduced state: the W state has tangle zero (it
carries no three-way correlations of the GHZ type), while the GHZ state has tangle one.

The physical distinction is stark. Tracing out any one qubit from the GHZ state gives a
maximally mixed state with no entanglement between the remaining two qubits. The W state,
by contrast, retains bipartite entanglement in every reduced two-qubit state: losing one
qubit does not destroy the entanglement between the other two. This robustness property of
the W class has no parallel in the two-qubit or GHZ settings.

Why This Matters for Gate Synthesis

The six-class taxonomy matters for circuit synthesis because a gate's ability to create or
interconvert these classes is a direct measure of its entangling power. A gate that can
generate GHZ-class states from separable inputs must have enough non-local content to
establish genuine tripartite entanglement; a gate that can only generate W-class states from
GHZ inputs, or vice versa, is missing some entangling ingredient. Since the GHZ and W classes
are SLOCC-inequivalent, no amount of local single-qubit operations can make up for a
deficiency in the gate's non-local part.

For the Toffoli gate specifically: the Toffoli maps  to  while leaving
all other basis states unchanged. Applied to the separable input
, the Toffoli produces a state with genuine tripartite entanglement
in the GHZ class. A gate that could only create W-class states from product states would be
insufficient to implement the Toffoli; the rank argument used by Yu, Duan, and Ying
(sec:toffoli) is essentially a quantitative version of this qualitative observation.

The Generalised Schmidt Decomposition: Acín et al.

The SLOCC classification tells us which class a state belongs to, but not where
within its class it sits. For bipartite states, the Schmidt decomposition answers the latter
question completely: within the entangled class, a state is characterised up to local unitary
equivalence by its Schmidt coefficients. For three-qubit states, the analogous question is
what the correct canonical form is, and this is what Acín et al.  resolved.

The difficulty is that the naive generalisation fails. A bipartite state  has a Schmidt decomposition  because the SVD of the coefficient matrix gives orthonormal bases on
both sides simultaneously. For a tripartite state , the coefficient array is a  tensor, and tensors do not
admit a straightforward analogue of the SVD that simultaneously orthogonalises all three
index directions. There is no basis in which a generic three-qubit state takes the form
 with orthonormal  on each subsystem.

[Acín et al. ]
		Every three-qubit pure state  can be written, up to local unitary equivalence,
	in the canonical form
	






	where , , and . The
	five parameters  together with the
	phase  form a complete set of local-unitary invariants.

The proof proceeds by induction on the number of parties and uses the fact that, for
three qubits, one can always find local unitaries that bring the coefficient tensor into the
stated form. The key step is to apply a local unitary on qubit  to make the coefficient
of  vanish (which is always possible since the  matrix of coefficients
for the  terms can be put into upper triangular form by a unitary on ), and
then apply local unitaries on  and  to diagonalise the remaining structure. After this
reduction, the five real parameters and the single phase  are all that remain.

This result has two important consequences. First, it shows that the local-unitary
equivalence classes of three-qubit pure states form a five-dimensional continuous family -
in contrast to the bipartite case, where the equivalence classes form a one-parameter family
(parametrised by the single Schmidt coefficient). Three-qubit entanglement is genuinely
richer, and any gate complexity measure that depends only on local unitary equivalence
classes must contend with this five-dimensional landscape. Second, the five parameters in
the canonical form align with the six SLOCC classes: the GHZ class corresponds to
; the W class to  but at least two
of the remaining  nonzero; and so on. The canonical form of Acín et al. is thus
a refinement of the coarser SLOCC classification of Dür, Vidal, and Cirac.



The Toffoli Gate: A Three-Qubit Lower Bound

With the entanglement landscape of three-qubit states in hand, we can now ask a concrete
circuit question: how many two-qubit gates does it take to implement the Toffoli gate
exactly? This was a long-standing open problem. Yu, Duan, and Ying  settled it.

The Gate and the Problem

The Toffoli gate  flips the target qubit
 if and only if both controls  and  are . It is the canonical three-qubit
gate: universal for reversible classical computation, and the building block of most quantum
arithmetic circuits. A five-gate implementation was known from the work of Sleator and
Weinfurter and later made explicit by others. The question was whether four gates could
suffice.

Numerical searches had failed to find a four-gate circuit, which suggested the answer was
no, but a proof was missing. The difficulty is that a proof needs to show that no four-gate
circuit - regardless of what single-qubit rotations are placed between the two-qubit gates
- can produce the Toffoli unitary. The search space is continuous and infinite, so
exhaustive checking is impossible.

The Rank Argument

Yu, Duan, and Ying approach the problem through the Schmidt rank of the Toffoli
gate viewed as an operator from one bipartition of the three qubits to another. Recall from
thm:schmidt that the Schmidt rank of a state measures how entangled it is; the
analogous quantity for an operator measures how non-locally it acts.

For an operator  acting on a bipartite system , the
operator Schmidt rank is the rank of the coefficient matrix obtained by writing 
in the operator basis  where  and  are orthonormal
bases for the spaces of operators on  and  respectively. An operator of Schmidt rank
 can create at most -dimensional entanglement between  and  when acting on
product states.

For the Toffoli gate, partition the three qubits as  versus  (the two
controls versus the target). The Toffoli acts as






which is a sum of four terms: three identity terms on  (for control states other than
) and one  on  (for ). The coefficient matrix in the  operator basis has rank 4 with respect to this bipartition.

Now consider a circuit with  two-qubit gates acting on three qubits. Each two-qubit gate
acts on some pair of qubits; it increases the operator Schmidt rank of the circuit with
respect to any bipartition by at most a factor of 2. Starting from rank 1 (the identity),
a circuit with  two-qubit gates can achieve operator Schmidt rank at most  with
respect to any bipartition. For the Toffoli, the operator Schmidt rank with respect to the
 partition is 4. So we need , giving . This recovers a
weak lower bound.

The Yu-Duan-Ying argument strengthens this by considering multiple bipartitions
simultaneously. A three-qubit system has three possible bipartitions: , , and
. The Toffoli gate has a specific operator Schmidt rank with respect to each
bipartition, and these ranks must all be achievable simultaneously. The critical observation
is that a single two-qubit gate can increase the rank with respect to at most two of
the three bipartitions at once (since it acts on two of the three qubits). By carefully
tracking how the ranks grow across all three bipartitions simultaneously, the authors show:

[Yu, Duan, and Ying ]
		Five two-qubit gates are both necessary and sufficient to implement the Toffoli gate exactly.
	Any circuit with four or fewer two-qubit gates, regardless of the single-qubit operations
	interspersed between them, cannot implement the Toffoli gate.

The necessity proof shows that after four two-qubit gates, the joint operator Schmidt rank
profile across all three bipartitions cannot reach the values required by the Toffoli. The
key step is a rank inequality: if the circuit has gates  acting on pairs
, then the operator Schmidt rank of the full circuit with
respect to bipartition  is bounded by the product of the ranks of
those  for which  straddles the bipartition .
Counting how many of the four gates can straddle each bipartition simultaneously, and
intersecting the resulting rank constraints, shows that the Toffoli's rank profile is
unreachable with four gates.

Connection to Entanglement Structure

The rank argument connects directly to the entanglement picture of
sec:three-qubit-ent. The Toffoli gate, applied to the product state
, produces




a state in the GHZ class (it has nonzero tangle). Creating GHZ-class entanglement from a
product state requires genuine tripartite non-local action, which is precisely what the rank
argument quantifies. A circuit with four or fewer two-qubit gates cannot build up enough
non-local content across all three bipartitions simultaneously to generate this class of
entanglement in the way the Toffoli requires.



Uniformly Controlled Rotations and Asymptotic Optimality

The results of sec:two-qubit-opt,sec:toffoli address specific gates. The question
for general -qubit unitaries is different: what is the asymptotic CNOT cost as  grows,
and can we construct circuits that achieve the known lower bound? Möttönen, Vartiainen,
Bergholm, and Salomaa  answered this for the problem of arbitrary quantum
state preparation, and their construction achieves the  lower bound up to a constant.

Uniformly Controlled Rotations

Recall from thm:csd that the cosine-sine decomposition splits an -qubit unitary
into two block-diagonal pieces and a middle cosine-sine block. The middle block, when fully
expanded, is a sequence of single-qubit rotations whose angles depend on the state of all
other qubits. This is the defining property of a uniformly controlled rotation.

[Uniformly controlled rotation]
	A -fold uniformly controlled rotation  of qubit 
	about axis  is a single-qubit rotation  applied to qubit
	, where the angle  depends on the joint state  of all  control
	qubits. For each of the  control states, a different angle is applied.



		
	 & 4 & 

	 & 3 & 

	 & 2 & 

	 & 1 & 

	qubit  & R_a(_j) & 				For each , the rotation is .
		Uniformly controlled rotation (UCR) . The rotation applied to qubit  depends on the joint state  of all  control qubits. The UCR is decomposed using Gray code ordering, costing exactly  CNOT gates.
	
In circuit terms, a UCR is a multiplexed rotation: it simultaneously encodes  different
rotation angles, selecting the correct one based on the control register's state. This is a
strict generalisation of the standard controlled rotation, which has  and two possible
angles ( and ).

Decomposing a UCR into CNOTs

A single -fold UCR can itself be decomposed into CNOT gates and single-qubit rotations.
The key tool is the Gray code ordering of the control states. By stepping through the 
control states in Gray code order (consecutive states differing in exactly one bit, as in
sec:graycodearg), the UCR can be implemented by a sequence of  single-qubit
rotations interleaved with  CNOT gates, where each CNOT flips one control bit to
advance to the next Gray code word. The angles of the single-qubit rotations are the Walsh-
Hadamard transform of the target angles , which ensures that the
product of all rotations in each branch of the control tree gives the correct total angle.

This Gray code decomposition costs exactly  CNOT gates for a -fold UCR on qubit .

The Full Decomposition and Gate Count

An -qubit state transformation (mapping a fixed initial state to an arbitrary target
state) can be implemented by a sequence of UCRs applied recursively using the cosine-sine
structure of thm:csd. At the top level, one CSD application splits the -qubit
unitary into two -qubit block-diagonal unitaries and one -fold UCR on the
top qubit. The block-diagonal unitaries are handled by recursion. The UCR costs 
CNOT gates.

Unrolling the recursion and summing the CNOT counts at each level:



which solves to  for the recursive structure. However, the UCR
decomposition of Möttönen et al. is more efficient than the naive recursion because
adjacent CNOTs from successive UCRs cancel when the control qubit is the same. After
cancellation, the total count is:

[Möttönen et al. ]
		Any -qubit state transformation can be implemented by a quantum circuit of
	


	This is asymptotically , matching the theoretical lower bound up to a constant.

The lower bound comes from a degrees-of-freedom argument: an -qubit state transformation
has  real parameters (the amplitudes and phases of the target state, minus
normalisation and global phase). Since each CNOT gate can bind at most four independent
real parameters (one from each adjacent single-qubit block, by the Z-Y decomposition), the
number of CNOTs needed is at least .
The Möttönen construction achieves this bound with a leading coefficient of  (since
, which for large  is ).


	The UCR framework is particularly natural from the perspective of Part I. The Z-Y
	decomposition handles single-qubit gates (zero CNOTs), the  factorisation and Gray
	code handle controlled single-qubit gates (two CNOTs), and the UCR framework is the
	systematic extension of the same Gray code idea to arbitrarily many control qubits. Each
	layer of the recursion is a direct generalisation of the step that went before it.



Beyond the Quantum Shannon Decomposition: Block-ZXZ

The Möttönen et al. construction is asymptotically optimal, but asymptotic optimality
leaves room for improvement at practical circuit sizes. For five or six qubits - the range
relevant to near-term quantum devices - the constant factor matters. Shirilord and
Rahimi-Keshari  proposed a decomposition that beats the best previously
known exact method for all finite .

The Quantum Shannon Decomposition and Its Limit

The quantum Shannon decomposition (QSD), introduced by Shende, Bullock, and Markov,
applies the CSD of thm:csd recursively: at each level, one application of the CSD
splits a  unitary into two -qubit unitaries (the block-diagonal
outer factors) and one uniformly controlled  gate (the middle cosine-sine block). The
two -qubit unitaries are handled by recursion; the UCR is decomposed using the Gray
code as above.

Unrolling the recursion and accounting for cancellations between adjacent UCRs gives a
CNOT count of



asymptotically. This was the best known exact decomposition for over fifteen years.

The Block-ZXZ Structure

Shirilord and Rahimi-Keshari observe that the QSD's recursive split, while natural from the
CSD perspective, is not the only way to factor a  unitary into smaller
pieces. They propose an alternative based on the block-ZXZ decomposition-a
multi-qubit analogue of the single-qubit Z-Y (Euler angle) decomposition of thm:zy.

Recall that for a single-qubit gate, the Z-Y decomposition 
expresses  as a product of three rotations about two alternating axes. The block-ZXZ
decomposition generalises this: for an -qubit unitary, it writes





		
	Block-ZXZ decomposition of an -qubit unitary . The alternating -- structure is a direct generalisation of the single-qubit Z-Y decomposition. The Hadamard conjugation identity converts -type blocks to -type blocks at the  interface, enabling additional CNOT cancellations not available in the QSD.
	
where  and  are block-diagonal unitaries with -type structure (they act
diagonally in the computational basis), and  is a block-diagonal unitary with -type
structure (it acts in the -basis). Each block-diagonal factor can itself be decomposed
into UCRs of the corresponding type, and the recursion proceeds from there.

The efficiency gain comes from two sources. First, the block-ZXZ split produces fewer
interaction terms between blocks than the CSD-based QSD, because the -type and -type
blocks commute with different subsets of the CNOT gates, enabling more cancellations.
Second, the decomposition is hierarchical in a way that aligns with the rotation-gate
identities of sec:rotation-conjugation: the Hadamard conjugation identity
 allows -type UCRs to be converted to -type UCRs
using only single-qubit gates, which creates additional cancellation opportunities at the
boundary between the  and  blocks.

[Shirilord and Rahimi-Keshari ]
		The block-ZXZ decomposition implements any -qubit unitary using
	


	which is  fewer CNOTs than the quantum Shannon decomposition for
	every .

For , the theorem gives  CNOT gates, compared to 20 for the QSD. The saving grows
as  increases: for , the block-ZXZ method saves  CNOTs; for , it saves
. At practical circuit sizes, this is a meaningful reduction.

Connection to Part I

The block-ZXZ decomposition is the result that most directly rewards having read Part I
carefully. The Z-Y decomposition of thm:zy writes a single-qubit gate as
. The block-ZXZ decomposition writes an -qubit gate as , with
exactly the same alternating-axis structure. The Hadamard conjugation identity
 of cor:h-conj-rot is the tool that allows -type
blocks to be converted to -type blocks at the interface, just as the single-qubit identity
 is used in subsec:zy-xvar to pass between Z-Y and Z-X
variants of the single-qubit decomposition. The circuit identities of Part I are not just
background tools; they are the operational mechanism that makes the block-ZXZ counting
improvement possible.



Conclusion to Part II

This chapter has traced a complete narrative from the two-qubit case to the general-
case, with the entanglement structure of three-qubit states as the essential backdrop.

For two-qubit gates, the three-parameter picture of sec:kak and the Kraus-Cirac
decomposition of thm:kraus-cirac reduce the question of CNOT count to the question
of how many independent non-local parameters a gate has. The answer is three for a generic
 gate, and the papers of Vidal-Dawson and Vatan-Williams together show that three
CNOTs are both necessary and sufficient, with an explicit and optimal circuit for each tier.

For three-qubit gates, the picture is more complex. The SLOCC classification of Dür, Vidal,
and Cirac establishes that three-qubit entanglement has two genuinely inequivalent forms,
and the canonical form of Acín et al. shows that three-qubit states are parametrised by
five real invariants rather than one. The Toffoli gate, sitting firmly in the GHZ class,
requires five two-qubit gates by the rank argument of Yu, Duan, and Ying.

For general -qubit gates, the UCR framework of Möttönen et al. gives an asymptotically
optimal construction at  CNOTs, and the block-ZXZ decomposition of Shirilord and
Rahimi-Keshari improves the constant factor, reducing the CNOT count below the quantum
Shannon decomposition for every finite . Both constructions are direct descendants of the
Gray code and rotation-gate ideas developed in Part I.

The theoretical lower bound of  CNOTs for a generic -qubit
gate remains unachieved by any exact decomposition algorithm. Closing this gap is an open
problem.


Having surveyed the theoretical foundations of quantum circuit decomposition, we now turn to practical implementation. Part III transitions from the mathematical analysis of unitary operators to the design and construction of a working quantum circuit design tool. Open Quantum Composer Pro applies the concepts developed in Parts I and II-quantum gates, circuit structure, and decomposition algorithms-to create a professional-grade desktop application for quantum algorithm development. 


Quantum Composer

Open Quantum Composer Pro
Introduction

This part presents Open Quantum Composer Pro, a professional drag-and-drop quantum circuit composer. The remaining sections detail the system's architecture, implementation, features, testing approach, and directions for future development.

Background
Quantum computing represents a paradigm shift in computational methodology, leveraging quantum mechanical phenomena such as superposition and entanglement to solve problems intractable for classical computers. As quantum hardware becomes increasingly accessible through cloud platforms like IBM Quantum Experience, the need for effective quantum circuit design tools has grown substantially.

Quantum circuits are mathematical representations of quantum algorithms, consisting of quantum gates that manipulate qubits (quantum bits). The visual design of these circuits provides an intuitive approach to algorithm development, bridging the gap between theoretical quantum computing and practical implementation.

Problem Statement
Existing quantum circuit design tools often lack intuitive visual interfaces or require significant setup overhead. Developers and researchers need a tool that:

	Allows visual circuit composition through drag-and-drop interactions
	Generates executable quantum code automatically
	Provides immediate simulation results for circuit verification
	Supports custom gate definitions for research purposes

Objectives
The primary objectives of this project were:

	To develop a cross-platform desktop application for quantum circuit design
	To implement real-time code generation from visual representations
	To integrate quantum simulation capabilities for instant feedback
	To support advanced features including custom gates and multi-qubit operations

Related Work

Several quantum circuit design tools exist in the ecosystem:


		lX
		Tool           & Key Features                                 

		IBM Quantum Composer    & Web-based, cloud integration, limited offline support 

	Qiskit Circuit Composer & Script-based, steep learning curve                    

	Quantum Leaf            & Drag-and-drop, no local simulation                    

	Microsoft Quantum       & Visual Studio integration, complex setup              

		
Open Quantum Composer Pro distinguishes itself by providing a fully offline-capable desktop application with drag-and-drop functionality, real-time code synchronization, and built-in simulation without requiring external dependencies or cloud access.

System Architecture

The project implements the Model-View-Controller (MVC) architectural pattern, separating concerns into three distinct layers:

Directory Structure



Model Layer

The Model layer manages circuit state and data transformation:


	CircuitModel (models/circuitmodel.py): Maintains the quantum circuit state, including gate operations, qubit configurations, and simulation methods. Supports JSON serialization for project save/load functionality.
	QiskitCodeGenerator (models/codegenerator.py): Transforms the internal circuit representation into executable Qiskit Python code.
	QiskitCodeParser (models/codeparser.py): Parses Qiskit code bidirectionally to update the visual circuit representation.

View Layer

The View layer handles all user interface components:


	MainWindow (views/mainwindow.py): Provides the application shell with menu bar, toolbar, and tab management.
	PaletteView (views/paletteview.py): Displays available quantum gates as draggable elements.
	CircuitView (views/circuitview.py): Implements the custom grid-based circuit canvas with drag-and-drop handling.
	VisualizationView (views/visualizationview.py): Renders simulation results using Matplotlib.

Controller Layer

The Controller layer orchestrates interactions between Model and View:


	MainController (controllers/maincontroller.py): Manages all application logic including gate placement, code synchronization, simulation execution, and file I/O operations.

Implementation Details

GUI Framework Selection
PyQt6 was selected as the GUI framework for its:

	Cross-platform compatibility
	Rich signal-slot mechanism for event handling
	Comprehensive widget library
	Strong community support and documentation

Quantum Computing Framework
Qiskit serves as the backend quantum computing framework:

	qiskit: Core quantum circuit definitions
	qiskit-aer: High-performance simulator
	qiskit.quantuminfo: Statevector analysis

Key Implementation Features

Drag-and-Drop Circuit Design
The application implements a custom drag-and-drop system using Qt's drag-and-drop APIs:

[language=Python, caption=DropLabel Drag Event Handler]
def dragEnterEvent(self, event):
    if self.current_gate == "CONNECTOR": 
        event.ignore(); return
    if event.mimeData().hasText():
        text = event.mimeData().text()
        if text.startswith("MOVE:"):
            _, gate_name, _, _ = text.split(":")
        else:
            gate_name = text
        self.show_shadow(gate_name)
        event.acceptProposedAction()

Gates can be placed, moved, and deleted through intuitive mouse interactions.

Multi-Qubit Gate Support
Multi-qubit gates (CNOT, SWAP, CZ) are implemented with visual connectors showing control-target relationships:

[language=Python, caption=Multi-Qubit Gate Placement Logic]
def on_gate_dropped(self, gate_type, qubit_index, time_index):
    if gate_type in ["CX", "CY", "CZ", "CH", "SWAP"]:
        target_index = self.view.show_input_dialog(
            f"gate_type Gate", "Select Target Qubit:")
        # Validation and path clearance checks...
        self.model.add_gate(gate_type, qubit_index, time_index, 
                          target_index, params, matrix)

The system ensures path clearance for multi-qubit gates, preventing invalid circuit configurations.

Rotation Gates with Parameters
Parameterized gates (RX, RY, RZ, P) accept user-defined rotation angles in radians:

[language=Python, caption=Parameterized Gate Input]
if gate_type in ["RX", "RY", "RZ", "P"]:
    text, ok = QInputDialog.getText(
        self.view, "Rotation Angle", "Enter Angle (radians):", 
        text="1.57")
    if ok and text:
        try: 
            params = float(text)
        except ValueError: 
            return

Two-Way Code Synchronization
The application maintains bidirectional synchronization between visual circuit representation and Qiskit code:


	Visual to Code: When gates are dropped or moved, code generates automatically
	Code to Visual: Edits to the code editor update the circuit grid after a debounce period (600ms)

[language=Python, caption=Debounced Code Parsing]
self.debounce_timer = QTimer()
self.debounce_timer.setInterval(600)
self.debounce_timer.setSingleShot(True)
self.debounce_timer.timeout.connect(self.on_code_parsed)

def on_code_parsed(self):
    code = self.view.code_view.get_code()
    new_ops = self.parser.parse_to_model(code, self.model.num_qubits)
    if new_ops is not None:
        self.model.operations = new_ops
        self.redraw_circuit_from_model()

System Features

Gate Library
The application supports a comprehensive set of quantum gates:


		lX
		Category & Gates                

		Single-Qubit      & H, X, Y, Z, S, T, SX          

	Rotation          & RX, RY, RZ, P (Phase)         

	Multi-Qubit       & CX, CY, CZ, CH, SWAP          

	Custom            & User-defined unitary matrices 

		
Simulation Capabilities
The built-in Qiskit Aer simulator provides:


	Histogram Visualization: Measurement outcome probabilities
	Statevector Analysis: Bloch sphere representation
	Custom Gate Support: Arbitrary unitary matrix definitions

[language=Python, caption=Simulation Execution]
def run_simulation(self):
    counts, statevector = self.model.run_simulation()
    self.view.viz_view.plot_histogram(counts)
    self._update_qubit_visualizations(statevector)
    self.view.right_tabs.setCurrentIndex(1)

Export Functionality
Users can export their work in multiple formats:

	Image Export: PNG format for circuit diagrams
	Code Export: Python files ready for IBM Quantum execution
	Project Save: JSON format for project persistence

Testing Approach

The project includes comprehensive test coverage in software-verification/tests/:

[language=Python, caption=Test Example]
class TestCircuitModelInitialization:
    def test_default_initialization(self):
        model = CircuitModel()
        assert model.num_qubits == 3

class TestMultiQubitGateOperations:
    def test_cnot_placement(self):
        model = CircuitModel(num_qubits=3)
        model.add_gate('CX', 0, 0, target_index=2)
        ops = model.get_operations()
        assert len(ops) == 1
        assert ops[0]['gate'] == 'CX'

Test execution commands:


Results and Discussion

Open Quantum Composer Pro successfully delivers all specified objectives:


	Visual Circuit Design: Intuitive drag-and-drop interface for placing quantum gates
	Real-Time Code Generation: Instant Qiskit code updates as circuits are modified
	Integrated Simulation: Built-in quantum simulator with visualization
	Custom Gate Support: User-defined unitary matrices for research applications
	Cross-Platform: Builds available for Windows, macOS, and Linux

The MVC architecture proved highly effective, allowing independent development of UI components and business logic. The signal-slot mechanism in PyQt6 provided clean event handling between components.

Technical Stack


		lX
		Component & Technology 

		GUI Framework      & PyQt6               

	Quantum Backend    & Qiskit, Qiskit-Aer  

	Visualization      & Matplotlib          

	Build Tool         & PyInstaller         

	Testing            & pytest              

		
Future Work

Potential enhancements for future development:


	Bloch Sphere Visualization: Interactive 3D visualization of quantum states
	Algorithm Templates: Pre-built circuit templates for common algorithms (Shor's, Grover's)
	Cloud Integration: Direct connection to IBM Quantum devices for hardware execution
	Version Control: Git-like versioning for circuit designs
	Plugin System: Extensible architecture for custom gates and analysis tools

Conclusion to Open Quantum Composer Pro

Open Quantum Composer Pro demonstrates the successful integration of classical desktop application development with quantum computing frameworks. The project provides a practical tool for quantum algorithm design, making quantum computing more accessible through intuitive visual interfaces and real-time feedback mechanisms.

The implementation showcases software engineering best practices including MVC architecture, comprehensive testing, and cross-platform deployment. This capstone project represents a meaningful contribution to the quantum computing ecosystem by lowering the barrier to entry for quantum circuit development.






Conclusion

Summary of Thesis

This thesis has presented a comprehensive investigation into quantum computation from both theoretical and practical perspectives, organised in three parts.

Part I established the mathematical foundations of quantum computation. Beginning with Hilbert spaces and the four postulates of quantum mechanics, we developed the circuit model from elementary gates up to the decomposition tools needed for optimal synthesis. Key results include the Z-Y decomposition for single-qubit gates, the  factorisation for multi-qubit universality, and the Gray code argument for -qubit systems.

Part II surveyed the optimality literature, providing definitive results on gate complexity. For two-qubit gates, three CNOT gates are both necessary and sufficient. The Toffoli gate requires five two-qubit gates. For general -qubit gates, the uniformly controlled rotations achieve  CNOT count, asymptotically optimal, and the block-ZXZ decomposition improves practical constants.

Part III transitioned from theory to practice with Open Quantum Composer Pro, a professional drag-and-drop quantum circuit design and simulation tool built with Python and PyQt6. The application enables visual circuit composition, real-time Qiskit code generation, and built-in simulation, demonstrating the integration of software engineering practices with quantum computing frameworks.

This work contributes to the quantum computing ecosystem by bridging the gap between abstract circuit decomposition theory and practical tool development, making quantum algorithm design more accessible through intuitive visual interfaces.

1em
Future Directions:

    Extend Open Quantum Composer Pro with Bloch sphere visualization
    Add pre-built algorithm templates (Shor's, Grover's)
    Integrate with IBM Quantum hardware for cloud execution
    Develop plugin architecture for custom gates
    Investigate better CNOT bounds for the generic -qubit case







Operator Decompositions
The Hierarchy of Operators


		Hierarchy of operators in quantum mechanics.
		

More Operators

We have thus far looked at some basics. Before we go into some more detail about what kinds of information a state vector in Hilbert Space carries and how to represent it, among other things, let's look at some operators that we would need.

Rotation Gates
We have already seen that the only allowed operation in quantum computation are the unitary operations and also that unitary operators are essentially rotations. Thus, it follows that we now look at the three prominent, parameterized rotation gates.
Rotation gates are defined by :









Two additional properties hold:





The following conjugation identities are used throughout the decomposition proofs:


[Conjugation by ]
		 and .


	For the first identity, compute directly:
	*

	For the second identity:
	*



Controlled-U Gates

Controlled Unitary Gates can be thought of as a generalization of the familiar CNOT gate.

, .
Any unitary can be promoted to a controlled version. Note that  and  are
equal as 1-qubit gates (up to global phase), but  and 
differ as 2-qubit gates for .


Spectral Decomposition Theorem

[Spectral Decomposition]
		Any normal operator  can be diagonalised in an orthonormal basis:
	,
	where  is an orthonormal eigenbasis and  are the eigenvalues.


	Let  be normal and let ,  be orthogonal projectors. Then
	.
	For a normal operator the cross terms vanish:  and , giving .
	Normality of  follows from:
	


	where the middle step uses . By induction on dimension,  is
	diagonalisable, completing the decomposition.

For Hermitian operators, eigenvalues  are real and the spectral form
 represents a physical observable: eigenvalues are the possible
measurement outcomes and  are the corresponding post-measurement projectors.

Polar Decomposition

[Polar Decomposition]
	Any operator  can be written as  (left) or 
	(right), where  is unitary and the square roots are positive operators.

We write  rather than  because operator functions are defined
only on normal operators and  may not be normal. Normality of  follows from:




Singular Value Decomposition

[SVD]
	Any operator  can be written as , where ,  are unitary
	and  is diagonal with non-negative singular values.

SVD follows from polar decomposition: .


	Every operator is a unitary transformation away from being normal.







Quantum Information

Fundamental Concepts

Information and Reversibility

One of the distinct features of Quantum Computation is that it is necessarily reversible computation. This is one of the reasons that although quantum mechanics was known since the early part of the 20th Century, Quantum Computation was only proposed in early 1980s: it was not obvious that quantum systems yield well to computation since there are fundamental operations like 'and' and 'or' that are not reversible. But, it was later realized that computation can be made to become reversible by using work bits.

Unitary Operations neither destroy nor create information-they merely transform it. So long as
information is a vector in a known vector space, unitary operations cannot destroy it.
This connects to reversibility: it is a known result that reversible operations do not dissipate energy (Landauer's
principle).

Reversible circuits can simulate non-reversible circuits with modest overhead:
for a reversible implementation of a circuit with space complexity  and time complexity
, the space overhead is .

Reversible Copying

The operation  is a reversible implementation of any
function , including functions that are not themselves reversible. It is
realised using one CNOT gate per bit in the zero-initialised copy register.




Pure States and Mixed States

[Pure State]
	A pure state is a quantum state described completely by a single unit vector
	. It evolves unitarily and yields definite probabilities upon measurement.

)[Mixed State]
	A mixed state) represents a statistical ensemble  of pure
	states with associated probabilities . Mixed states arise from incomplete knowledge of
	the system's preparation, or from entanglement with an unobserved environment.

Note that the radial coordinate in the Bloch Sphere distinguishes pure states (surface, ) from mixed states (interior,
). The polar angle  controls the relative weights of  and .
The azimuthal angle  encodes the relative phase between components. Two states
differing only in  are statistically indistinguishable under direct measurement;
the effect of  is only revealed through quantum interference. This relative phase is
called coherence).

Density Operators)

[Density Operator]
	For an ensemble , the density operator is
	


	For a pure state , .


	The weight  is the probability of ensemble member , not the eigenvalue of
	, although the expressions look superficially similar. The linearity
	in a superposition is distinct from the linearity across pure states in a mixture.

A density matrix satisfies four properties: (i) Hermiticity ;
(ii) positive semi-definiteness (all eigenvalues ); (iii) unit trace ;
and (iv) the pure-state criterion . The diagonal entries give probabilities of
measuring each basis state; the off-diagonal entries are coherence terms carrying
relative phase information.

Partial Trace and Reduced Density Operators

For a composite system , the reduced density operator of subsystem  is
. Tracing out part of an entangled system can transform a pure
state into a mixed state. The trace satisfies the cyclic property .

Lemma on Pure-State Density Matrices


		A density operator of a pure state cannot have non-zero elements in all diagonal positions.


	Pure-state density operators are projectors. Since they are positive operators, they are
	diagonalisable. Let  with diagonal entries . All
	off-diagonal elements of a projector are zero in the eigenbasis, so for any ,
	at least one of ,  is zero. Therefore exactly one diagonal entry is non-zero.


	lem:puredensity provides a practical test: a density matrix with more than one
	non-zero diagonal entry represents a mixed state.




Separability and Entanglement

[Entanglement]
	A bipartite pure state  is separable if
	; otherwise it is entangled. For
	mixed states,  is separable if ;
	otherwise it is entangled.

A canonical entangled state is . Entanglement
has no classical counterpart. Most 2-qubit states in  are mathematically entangled;
separable states occupy only a small region of state space.

Bell States

[Bell States]
	The four Bell states (EPR pairs) form an orthonormal basis for the two-qubit Hilbert space:
	*

To transform from the computational basis to the Bell basis, one applies .

Schmidt Decomposition

[Schmidt Decomposition]
		For any pure bipartite state , there exist
	orthonormal bases  and , and non-negative reals 
	with , such that
	


	The  are the Schmidt coefficients and the number of non-zero terms is the
	Schmidt rank.

The Schmidt decomposition is the singular value decomposition applied to the coefficient
matrix of  in the computational basis. It is defined for pure bipartite states;
its extension to multipartite systems remains an active research problem.


	Schmidt rank  if and only if the state is entangled.

Measures of Entanglement

Entanglement measures must not increase under local operations and classical communication
(LOCC), and must equal zero for separable states.

Pure-State Measures

For bipartite pure states, entanglement measures are totally ordered. The unique measure is
the von Neumann entropy:



Entanglement of distillation equals entanglement of creation, and both equal .

Mixed-State Measures

For mixed states, entanglement forms only a partial order. The entanglement of formation is:



In general : distillable entanglement does not exceed entanglement cost.
Concurrence provides a closed-form measure for 2-qubit states; for mixed states one
expresses the state in the magic basis, sums the squares of the coefficients, and takes the
square root. The value ranges from  (separable) to  (maximally entangled).

Other measures include negativity (based on the PPT criterion), squashed entanglement (based
on conditional mutual information), and the Schmidt measure (logarithm of the Schmidt rank).

In the asymptotic setting: the distillable entanglement  is the rate at which maximally
entangled pairs can be extracted from many copies of a state; the entanglement cost  is
the rate at which such pairs are required to prepare the state. For mixed states 
in general, establishing that entanglement manipulation is thermodynamically irreversible.



Circuit Identities

The conjugation relations of rotation gates from the appendix and the  factorisation
of thm:abc are particular instances of a broader family of circuit identities:
algebraic equalities between sequences of gates that look different on paper but implement
the same unitary transformation. Knowing a library of such identities is what allows a
compiler-or a human analyst-to simplify a circuit, swap one gate for a cheaper one, or
re-express an operation in a different native gate set.

The most useful identities follow directly from the structure of the Pauli group and the
definition of the CNOT gate. The Pauli operators satisfy , which means
each is its own inverse. This self-inverse property is behind most of the identities below:
inserting  anywhere inside a product allows terms to be shuffled or cancelled.

[Hadamard conjugation of Pauli operators]
		The Hadamard gate interchanges the - and -axes of the Bloch sphere. Concretely,
	




	Direct matrix computation. For the first identity:
	







	The remaining two follow similarly.

[Hadamard conjugation of rotation gates]
		




	Both follow from 
	and the conjugation  established above. The cosine term is unaffected by conjugation,
	and the sine term transforms as the Pauli does:
	.

This corollary has a direct practical consequence: a  rotation on one hardware
platform can be rewritten as an  rotation sandwiched between two Hadamard gates,
and vice versa. Platforms with a native  gate but no  gate can therefore still
implement any single-qubit unitary.

[Phase kickback]
		Let  for some eigenstate  and phase .
	If the control qubit is in the state  and the target
	is , then the controlled- gate acts as
	



	The phase  is "kicked back" onto the control qubit, leaving the target unchanged.


	.

Phase kickback is the engine behind the quantum phase estimation algorithm and behind the
Hadamard-test circuit. It also explains why the controlled- gate (CZ) is symmetric in
control and target: since , each qubit kicks a phase of  back onto
the other.

[CNOT cascade identity]
		Three CNOT gates with alternating control and target realise the SWAP gate:
	




	
		
	qubit  & 1 &  & 1 & 

	qubit  &  & -1 &  & 		SWAP
	CNOT cascade identity . Three alternating CNOT gates swap the states of two qubits. This is optimal: no circuit with fewer than three CNOTs can implement SWAP.
		

	Proof.
	Verify on each computational basis state. For :
	*

This identity matters because the SWAP gate itself is costly (it requires three CNOTs), so
recognising patterns in a circuit that implement a SWAP can unlock simplification
opportunities. It also sets a lower bound: as Vatan and Williams showed
(ch:optimality), computing SWAP requires at least three CNOTs, so the cascade is tight.


	Collecting circuit identities into a rewrite system-a set of pattern-matching rules-is
	the basis of most quantum circuit optimisers. The identities above, together with the
	conjugation relations of sec:rotation-conjugation, are sufficient to derive the
	complete set of two-qubit rewrite rules used in tools such as the ZX-calculus. The deeper
	reason they work is that the Pauli group has a rigid algebraic structure: any product of
	Paulis is again a Pauli (up to phase), and conjugation by Clifford gates permutes the Paulis.





[Control-target symmetry]
		This result is a standard identity from Nielsen and Chuang : 
	For any pair of qubits  and , the gates  and  are related by
	local unitaries. Specifically,
	


	where  denotes the Hadamard gate applied to each of the two qubits.


	We compute directly in the computational basis on the two relevant qubits. Recall
	, , and . We verify the identity on each basis
	state:
	*
	Carrying out the remaining two basis cases yields the matrix of . 


Glossary of Terms


AncillaAn auxiliary quantum register introduced in a computation but not part of
	the primary input or output.
Bell StatesThe four maximally entangled 2-qubit states
	, forming an
	orthonormal basis.
Bloch SphereA unit 2-sphere whose surface represents all pure single-qubit states.
CNOTControlled-NOT gate: flips the target qubit if and only if the control is
	.
Clifford GroupThe group generated by ; circuits
	restricted to this group are efficiently classically simulable
	(Gottesman-Knill Theorem ).
CoherenceRelative phase between components of a quantum superposition; captured
	by off-diagonal entries of the density matrix.
ConcurrenceAn entanglement measure for 2-qubit states in .
Density Operator; the general
	representation of both pure and mixed quantum states.
EPR PairA maximally entangled 2-qubit state, named after Einstein, Podolsky, and
	Rosen.
Gottesman-Knill TheoremClifford-group-only circuits are efficiently classically
	simulable.
Hadamard Gate; creates equal superposition; self-inverse.
Hermitian OperatorSelf-adjoint (); represents a physical observable;
	has real eigenvalues.
Hilbert SpaceA complete complex inner product space; the state space of a quantum
	system.
Magic BasisA 2-qubit basis that minimises CNOT count in optimal circuit synthesis
	and arises in teleportation protocols.
Normal OperatorCommutes with its adjoint (); admits
	spectral decomposition.
Partial TraceOperation  that reduces a composite state to a
	reduced density operator for one subsystem.
Pauli OperatorsThe four  matrices  satisfying
	.
Phase KickbackPhenomenon in which a controlled operation causes the function value
	to appear as a phase on the control qubit.
POVMPositive Operator-Valued Measure: a general measurement framework, useful when
	only outcome probabilities (not post-measurement states) are needed.
ProjectorAn operator  with ; orthogonal if additionally .
QubitThe two-dimensional quantum analogue of a classical bit.
Schmidt Decomposition; the SVD
	of the coefficient matrix of a pure bipartite state.
Schmidt RankThe number of non-zero Schmidt coefficients;  iff the state is
	entangled.
Solovay-Kitaev TheoremAn efficient universal gate set can approximate any
	single-qubit gate to error  in  gates .
Spectral Decomposition for any normal operator .
Superdense CodingProtocol transmitting 2 classical bits via 1 qubit over a
	quantum channel, using pre-shared entanglement.
SuperoperatorA completely positive, trace-preserving linear map on density
	operators; models general quantum operations.
TeleportationProtocol transferring an unknown qubit state using a shared EPR pair
	and 2 classical bits.
Toffoli GateControlled-Controlled-NOT; universal for reversible classical computation.
Unitary OperatorAn operator satisfying ; models closed-system
	time evolution.
Von Neumann MeasurementA projective measurement in an orthonormal basis; synonymous
	with sharp or projective measurement.



Reference Equations

Rotation Gates and Unitary Decomposition











States and Measurement








Bell States







Entanglement and Entropy






Notation

	





99

		Nielsen, M.A. and Chuang, I.L.
	Quantum Computation and Quantum Information.
	Cambridge University Press, 2000.

		Vidal, G. and Dawson, C.M.
	Universal quantum circuit for two-qubit transformations with three controlled-NOT gates.
	Physical Review A, 69:010301, 2004.

		Vatan, F. and Williams, C.
	Optimal quantum circuits for general two-qubit gates.
	Physical Review A, 69:032315, 2004.

		Gottesman, D.
	Theory of fault-tolerant quantum computation.
	Physical Review A, 57(1):127-137, 1998.

		Dawson, C.M. and Nielsen, M.A.
	The Solovay-Kitaev algorithm.
	Quantum Information  Computation, 6(1):81-95, 2006.

		Kraus, B. and Cirac, J.I.
	Optimal creation of entanglement using a two-qubit gate.
	Physical Review A, 63:062309, 2001.

		Dur, W., Vidal, G., and Cirac, J.I.
	Three qubits can be entangled in two inequivalent ways.
	Physical Review A, 62:062314, 2000.

		Acin, A., Andrianov, A., Costa, L., Jane, E., Latorre, J.I., and Tarrach, R.
	Generalized Schmidt decomposition and classification of three-quantum-bit states.
	Physical Review Letters, 85(7):1560-1563, 2000.

		Yu, N., Duan, R., and Ying, M.
	Five two-qubit gates are necessary for implementing the Toffoli gate.
	Physical Review A, 88:010304(R), 2013.

		Mottonen, M., Vartiainen, J.J., Bergholm, V., and Salomaa, M.M.
	Transformation of quantum states using uniformly controlled rotations.
	Quantum Information  Computation, 5(6):467-473, 2005.

		Shirilord, A. and Rahimi-Keshari, S.
	Beyond quantum Shannon decomposition: circuit construction for -qubit gates based on
	block-ZXZ decomposition.
	arXiv preprint, arXiv:2403.13508, 2024.

	 Qiskit contributors. "Qiskit: An Open-source Framework for Quantum Computing." zenodo, 2023.



